<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en"
	xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
	<head>
		<meta charset="utf-8"></meta>
		<title>The Waste Land</title>
		<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="wasteland.css" class="day" title="day"/>
		<link rel="alternate stylesheet" type="text/css" href="wasteland-night.css" class="night" title="night"/>
		<!-- <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="wasteland-night.css" class="night" title="night"/> -->
	</head>
	<body>
		<section epub:type="frontmatter" id="frontmatter">
			<section epub:type="titlepage" id="titlepage">
				<h1>The Waste Land</h1>
				<div class="aut">T.S. Eliot</div>
				<div epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>
						<span xml:lang="la">"Nam Sibyllam quidem Cumis ego ipse oculis
							meis<br />vidi in ampulla pendere, et cum illi pueri dicerent</span>: <br />
						<span xml:lang="grc"
							>&#x03A3;&#x03AF;&#x03B2;&#x03C5;&#x03BB;&#x03BB;&#x03B1;
							&#x03C4;&#x03AF;
							&#x03F4;&#x03AD;&#x03BB;&#x03B5;&#x03B9;&#x03C2;<!--Sibylla ti theleis-->
						</span>; <span xml:lang="la">respondebat illa</span>: <span xml:lang="grc"
							>&#x03AC;&#x03C0;&#x03BF;&#x03F4;&#x03B1;&#x03B3;&#x03B5;&#x1FD6;&#x03B3;
							&#x03F4;&#x03AD;&#x03BB;&#x03E3;<!--apothanein thelo-->
						</span>."</p>
				</div>
				<p epub:type="dedication">For Ezra Pound: <span xml:lang="it">il miglior
						fabbro</span></p>
			</section>
		</section>
		<section epub:type="bodymatter" id="bodymatter">

			<section id="ch1">
				<h2>I. THE BURIAL OF THE DEAD</h2>
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div>April is the cruellest month, breeding</div>
					<div>Lilacs out of the dead land, mixing</div>
					<div>Memory and desire, stirring</div>
					<div>Dull roots with spring rain.</div>
					<div>Winter kept us warm, covering</div>
					<div>Earth in forgetful snow, feeding</div>
					<div>A little life with dried tubers.</div>
					<div>Summer surprised us, coming over the Starnbergersee</div>
					<div>With a shower of rain; we stopped in the colonnade,</div>
					<div>And went on in sunlight, into the Hofgarten,<span class="lnum"
							>10</span>
					</div>
					<div>And drank coffee, and talked for an hour.</div>
					<div  xml:lang="de">Bin gar keine Russin, stamm' aus Litauen, echt
						deutsch.</div>
					<div>And when we were children, staying at the archduke's,</div>
					<div>My cousin's, he took me out on a sled,</div>
					<div>And I was frightened. He said, Marie,</div>
					<div>Marie, hold on tight. And down we went.</div>
					<div>In the mountains, there you feel free.</div>
					<div>I read, much of the night, and go south in the winter.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div>What are the roots that clutch, what branches grow</div>
					<div id="ln20">Out of this stony rubbish? Son of man,<a epub:type="noteref" class="noteref"
						href="#note-1">*</a><span class="lnum">20</span>
					</div>
					<div>You cannot say, or guess, for you know only</div>
					<div>A heap of broken images, where the sun beats,</div>
					<div id="ln23">And the dead tree gives no shelter, the cricket no relief,<a
						epub:type="noteref" class="noteref" href="#note-2">*</a></div>
					<div>And the dry stone no sound of water. Only</div>
					<div>There is shadow under this red rock,</div>
					<div>(Come in under the shadow of this red rock),</div>
					<div>And I will show you something different from either</div>
					<div>Your shadow at morning striding behind you</div>
					<div>Or your shadow at evening rising to meet you;</div>
					<div>I will show you fear in a handful of dust.<span class="lnum"
							>30</span>
					</div>
					<blockquote xml:lang="de">
						<div>
							<div id="ln31">Frisch weht der Wind<a epub:type="noteref" class="noteref"
									href="#note-3">*</a>
							</div>
							<div>Der Heimat zu</div>
							<div>Mein Irisch Kind,</div>
							<div>Wo weilest du?</div>
						</div>
					</blockquote>
					<div>"You gave me hyacinths first a year ago;</div>
					<div>"They called me the hyacinth girl."</div>
					<div>&#x2015;Yet when we came back, late, from the Hyacinth
						garden,</div>
					<div>Your arms full, and your hair wet, I could not</div>
					<div>Speak, and my eyes failed, I was neither</div>
					<div>Living nor dead, and I knew nothing,<span class="lnum"
							>40</span>
					</div>
					<div>Looking into the heart of light, the silence.</div>
					<div xml:lang="de" id="ln42">
						<em>Od' und leer das Meer</em>.<a epub:type="noteref" class="noteref" href="#note-4">*</a>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div>Madame Sosostris, famous clairvoyante,</div>
					<div>Had a bad cold, nevertheless</div>
					<div>Is known to be the wisest woman in Europe,</div>
					<div id="ln46">With a wicked pack of cards. Here, said she,<a
						epub:type="noteref" class="noteref" href="#note-5">*</a></div>
					<div>Is your card, the drowned Phoenician Sailor,</div>
					<div>(Those are pearls that were his eyes. Look!)</div>
					<div>Here is Belladonna, the Lady of the Rocks,</div>
					<div>The lady of situations.<span class="lnum">50</span>
					</div>
					<div>Here is the man with three staves, and here the Wheel,</div>
					<div>And here is the one-eyed merchant, and this card,</div>
					<div>Which is blank, is something he carries on his back,</div>
					<div>Which I am forbidden to see. I do not find</div>
					<div>The Hanged Man. Fear death by water.</div>
					<div>I see crowds of people, walking round in a ring.</div>
					<div>Thank you. If you see dear Mrs. Equitone,</div>
					<div>Tell her I bring the horoscope myself:</div>
					<div>One must be so careful these days.</div>
				</div>
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div id="ln60">Unreal City,<a epub:type="noteref" class="noteref" href="#note-6">*</a><span
							class="lnum">60</span>
					</div>
					<div>Under the brown fog of a winter dawn,</div>
					<div>A crowd flowed over London Bridge, so many,</div>
					<div id="ln63">I had not thought death had undone so many.<a
							epub:type="noteref" class="noteref" href="#note-7">*</a>
					</div>
					<div id="ln64">Sighs, short and infrequent, were exhaled,<a epub:type="noteref" class="noteref"
						href="#note-8">*</a></div>
					<div>And each man fixed his eyes before his feet.</div>
					<div>Flowed up the hill and down King William Street,</div>
					<div>To where Saint Mary Woolnoth kept the hours</div>
					<div id="ln68">With a dead sound on the final stroke of nine.<a
							epub:type="noteref" class="noteref" href="#note-9">*</a>
					</div>
					<div>There I saw one I knew, and stopped him, crying
						"Stetson!</div>
					<div>"You who were with me in the ships at Mylae!<span class="lnum"
							>70</span>
					</div>
					<div>"That corpse you planted last year in your garden,</div>
					<div>"Has it begun to sprout? Will it bloom this year?</div>
					<div>"Or has the sudden frost disturbed its bed?</div>
				</div>
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div id="ln74">"Oh keep the Dog far hence, that's friend to men,<a
							epub:type="noteref" class="noteref" href="#note-10">*</a>
					</div>
					<div>"Or with his nails he'll dig it up again!</div>
					<div id="ln76">"You! <span xml:lang="fr">hypocrite lecteur! - mon semblable, -
							mon frere</span> !"<a epub:type="noteref" class="noteref" href="#note-11">*</a>
					</div>
				</div>
			</section>
			<section id="ch2">
				<h2>II. A GAME OF CHESS</h2>
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div id="ln77">The Chair she sat in, like a burnished throne,<a
						epub:type="noteref" class="noteref" href="#note-12">*</a></div>
					<div>Glowed on the marble, where the glass</div>
					<div>Held up by standards wrought with fruited vines</div>
					<div>From which a golden Cupidon peeped out<span class="lnum"
							>80</span>
					</div>
					<div>(Another hid his eyes behind his wing)</div>
					<div>Doubled the flames of sevenbranched candelabra</div>
					<div>Reflecting light upon the table as</div>
					<div>The glitter of her jewels rose to meet it,</div>
					<div>From satin cases poured in rich profusion;</div>
					<div>In vials of ivory and coloured glass</div>
					<div>Unstoppered, lurked her strange synthetic perfumes,</div>
					<div>Unguent, powdered, or liquid - troubled, confused</div>
					<div>And drowned the sense in odours; stirred by the air</div>
					<div>That freshened from the window, these ascended<span
							class="lnum">90</span>
					</div>
					<div>In fattening the prolonged candle-flames,</div>
					<div id="ln92">Flung their smoke into the laquearia,<a epub:type="noteref" class="noteref"
						href="#note-13">*</a></div>
					<div>Stirring the pattern on the coffered ceiling.</div>
					<div>Huge sea-wood fed with copper</div>
					<div>Burned green and orange, framed by the coloured stone,</div>
					<div>In which sad light a carved dolphin swam.</div>
					<div>Above the antique mantel was displayed</div>
					<div id="ln98">As though a window gave upon the sylvan scene<a
							epub:type="noteref" class="noteref" href="#note-14">*</a>
					</div>
					<div id="ln99">The change of Philomel, by the barbarous king<a
							epub:type="noteref" class="noteref" href="#note-15">*</a>
					</div>
					<div id="ln100">So rudely forced; yet there the nightingale<a
							epub:type="noteref" class="noteref" href="#note-16">*</a>
						<span class="lnum">100</span>
					</div>
					<div>Filled all the desert with inviolable voice</div>
					<div>And still she cried, and still the world pursues,</div>
					<div>"Jug Jug" to dirty ears.</div>
					<div>And other withered stumps of time</div>
					<div>Were told upon the walls; staring forms</div>
					<div>Leaned out, leaning, hushing the room enclosed.</div>
					<div>Footsteps shuffled on the stair.</div>
					<div>Under the firelight, under the brush, her hair</div>
					<div>Spread out in fiery points</div>
					<div>Glowed into words, then would be savagely still.<span
							class="lnum">110</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div class="linegroup">
						<div>"My nerves are bad to-night. Yes, bad. Stay with me.</div>
						<div>"Speak to me. Why do you never speak. Speak.</div>
						<div>"What are you thinking of? What thinking? What?</div>
						<div>"I never know what you are thinking. Think."</div>
					</div>
					<div class="linegroup">
						<div id="ln115">I think we are in rats' alley<a epub:type="noteref" class="noteref"
								href="#note-17">*</a>
						</div>
						<div>Where the dead men lost their bones.</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div>"What is that noise?"</div>
					<div class="indent" id="ln118">The wind under the door.<a epub:type="noteref" class="noteref" href="#note-18"
							>*</a>
					</div>
					<div>"What is that noise now? What is the wind doing?"</div>
					<div class="indent">Nothing again nothing.<span class="lnum">120</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div>"Do</div>
					<div>"You know nothing? Do you see nothing? Do you remember</div>
					<div>"Nothing?"</div>
				</div>
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div>I remember</div>
					<div>Those are pearls that were his eyes.</div>
					<div id="ln126">"Are you alive, or not? Is there nothing in your head?"<a
							epub:type="noteref" class="noteref" href="#note-19">*</a>
					</div>
					<div>But</div>
					<div>O O O O that Shakespeherian Rag&#x2015;</div>
					<div>It's so elegant</div>
					<div>So intelligent<span class="lnum">130</span>
					</div>
					<div>"What shall I do now? What shall I do?"</div>
					<div>I shall rush out as I am, and walk the street</div>
					<div>"With my hair down, so. What shall we do to-morrow?</div>
					<div>"What shall we ever do?"</div>
					<div>The hot water at ten.</div>
					<div>And if it rains, a closed car at four.</div>
					<div>And we shall play a game of chess,</div>
					<div id="ln138">Pressing lidless eyes and waiting for a knock upon the door.<a
							epub:type="noteref" class="noteref" href="#note-20">*</a>
					</div>
				</div>
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div>When Lil's husband got demobbed, I said -</div>
					<div>I didn't mince my words, I said to her myself,<span
							class="lnum">140</span>
					</div>
					<div>HURRY UP PLEASE ITS TIME</div>
					<div>Now Albert's coming back, make yourself a bit smart.</div>
					<div>He'll want to know what you done with that money he gave
						you</div>
					<div>To get yourself some teeth. He did, I was there.</div>
					<div>You have them all out, Lil, and get a nice set,</div>
					<div>He said, I swear, I can't bear to look at you.</div>
					<div>And no more can't I, I said, and think of poor Albert,</div>
					<div>He's been in the army four years, he wants a good time,</div>
					<div>And if you don't give it him, there's others will, I
						said.</div>
					<div>Oh is there, she said. Something o' that, I said.<span
							class="lnum">150</span>
					</div>
					<div>Then I'll know who to thank, she said, and give me a straight
						look.</div>
					<div>HURRY UP PLEASE ITS TIME</div>
					<div>If you don't like it you can get on with it, I said.</div>
					<div>Others can pick and choose if you can't.</div>
					<div>But if Albert makes off, it won't be for lack of
						telling.</div>
					<div>You ought to be ashamed, I said, to look so antique.</div>
					<div>(And her only thirty-one.)</div>
					<div>I can't help it, she said, pulling a long face,</div>
					<div>It's them pills I took, to bring it off, she said.</div>
					<div>(She's had five already, and nearly died of young George.)<span
							class="lnum">160</span>
					</div>
					<div>The chemist said it would be all right, but I've never been the
						same.</div>
					<div>You <em>are</em> a proper fool, I said.</div>
					<div>Well, if Albert won't leave you alone, there it is, I
						said,</div>
					<div>What you get married for if you don't want children?</div>
					<div>HURRY UP PLEASE ITS TIME</div>
					<div>Well, that Sunday Albert was home, they had a hot
						gammon,</div>
					<div>And they asked me in to dinner, to get the beauty of it
						hot&#x2015;</div>
					<div>HURRY UP PLEASE ITS TIME</div>
					<div>HURRY UP PLEASE ITS TIME</div>
					<div>Goonight Bill. Goonight Lou. Goonight May. Goonight.<span
							class="lnum">170</span>
					</div>
					<div>Ta ta. Goonight. Goonight.</div>
					<div>Good night, ladies, good night, sweet ladies, good night, good
						night.</div>
				</div>
			</section>
		</section>
		<section epub:type="backmatter" id="backmatter">
			<section epub:type="rearnotes" id="rearnotes">
				<h2>NOTES ON "THE WASTE LAND"</h2>
				<p>Not only the title, but the plan and a good deal of the incidental symbolism of
					the poem were suggested by Miss Jessie L. Weston's book on the Grail legend:
					From Ritual to Romance</p>
				<p>Indeed, so deeply am I indebted, Miss Weston's book will elucidate the
					difficulties of the poem much better than my notes can do; and I recommend it
					(apart from the great interest of the book itself) to any who think such
					elucidation of the poem worth the trouble. To another work of anthropology I am
					indebted in general, one which has influenced our generation profoundly; I mean
					The Golden Bough; I have used especially the two volumes Adonis, Attis, Osiris.
					Anyone who is acquainted with these works will immediately recognise in the poem
					certain references to vegetation ceremonies.</p>
				<section>
					<h3>I. THE BURIAL OF THE DEAD</h3>
					<div epub:type="rearnote" id="note-1">
						<p><a href="#ln20">Line 20.</a> Cf. Ezekiel 2:1.</p>
					</div>
					<div epub:type="rearnote" id="note-2">
						<p><a href="#ln23">23.</a> Cf. Ecclesiastes 12:5.</p>
					</div>
					<div epub:type="rearnote" id="note-3">
						<p><a href="#ln31">31.</a> V. Tristan und Isolde, i, verses 5-8.</p>
					</div>
					<div epub:type="rearnote" id="note-4">
						<p><a href="#ln42">42.</a> Id. iii, verse 24.</p>
					</div>
					<div epub:type="rearnote" id="note-5">
						<p><a href="#ln46">46.</a> I am not familiar with the exact constitution of the Tarot pack of
							cards, from which I have obviously departed to suit my own convenience.
							The Hanged Man, a member of the traditional pack, fits my purpose in two
							ways: because he is associated in my mind with the Hanged God of Frazer,
							and because I associate him with the hooded figure in the passage of the
							disciples to Emmaus in Part V. The Phoenician Sailor and the Merchant
							appear later; also the "crowds of people," and Death by Water is
							executed in Part IV. The Man with Three Staves (an authentic member of
							the Tarot pack) I associate, quite arbitrarily, with the Fisher King
							himself.</p>
					</div>
					<div epub:type="rearnote" id="note-6">
						<p><a href="#ln60">60.</a> Cf. Baudelaire:</p>
						<blockquote xml:lang="fr">
							<p>"Fourmillante cite;, cite; pleine de reves,<br />Ou le spectre en
								plein jour raccroche le passant."</p>
						</blockquote>
					</div>
					<div epub:type="rearnote" id="note-7">
						<p><a href="#ln63">63.</a> Cf. Inferno, iii. 55-7.</p>
						<blockquote xml:lang="it">
							<p>"si lunga tratta<br />di gente, ch'io non avrei mai creduto<br />che
								morte tanta n'avesse disfatta."</p>
						</blockquote>
					</div>
					<div epub:type="rearnote" id="note-8">
						<p><a href="#ln64">64.</a> Cf. Inferno, iv. 25-7:</p>
						<blockquote xml:lang="it">
							<p>"Quivi, secondo che per ascoltahre,<br />"non avea pianto, ma' che di
								sospiri,<br />"che l'aura eterna facevan tremare."</p>
						</blockquote>
					</div>
					<div epub:type="rearnote" id="note-9">
						<p><a href="#ln68">68.</a> A phenomenon which I have often noticed.</p>
					</div>
					<div epub:type="rearnote" id="note-10">
						<p><a href="#ln74">74.</a> Cf. the Dirge in Webster's White Devil .</p>
					</div>
					<div epub:type="rearnote" id="note-11">
						<p><a href="#ln76">76.</a> V. Baudelaire, Preface to Fleurs du Mal.</p>
					</div>
				</section>
				<section>
					<h3>II. A GAME OF CHESS</h3>
					<div epub:type="rearnote" id="note-12">
						<p><a href="#ln77">77.</a> Cf. Antony and Cleopatra, II. ii., l. 190.</p>
					</div>
					<div epub:type="rearnote" id="note-13">
						<p><a href="#ln92">92.</a> Laquearia. V. Aeneid, I. 726:</p>
						<blockquote xml:lang="la">
							<p>dependent lychni laquearibus aureis incensi, et noctem
								flammis<br />funalia vincunt.</p>
						</blockquote>
					</div>
					<div epub:type="rearnote" id="note-14">
						<p><a href="#ln98">98.</a> Sylvan scene. V. Milton, Paradise Lost, iv. 140.</p>
					</div>
					<div epub:type="rearnote" id="note-15">
						<p><a href="#ln99">99.</a> V. Ovid, Metamorphoses, vi, Philomela.</p>
					</div>
					<div epub:type="rearnote" id="note-16">
						<p><a href="#ln100">100.</a> Cf. Part III, l. 204.</p>
					</div>
					<div epub:type="rearnote" id="note-17">
						<p><a href="#ln115">115.</a> Cf. Part III, l. 195.</p>
					</div>
					<div epub:type="rearnote" id="note-18">
						<p><a href="#ln118">118.</a> Cf. Webster:</p>
						<blockquote>
							<p>"Is the wind in that door still?"</p>
						</blockquote>
					</div>
					<div epub:type="rearnote" id="note-19">
						<p><a href="#ln126">126.</a> Cf. Part I, l. 37, 48.</p>
					</div>
					<div epub:type="rearnote" id="note-20">
						<p><a href="#ln138">138.</a> Cf. the game of chess in Middleton's Women beware Women.</p>
					</div>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
